There was a king.
He wanted to live forever.
Like most kings do!
He called the minister, and ordered him to
work something out!
The minister, clever and wise that he was,
he gave this king a glass bottle with a potion
inside it.
And, just when the king was about to down
that potion in a gulp, the minister intervened
and said, “Just a minute, your Majesty.
You need to also know where this potion is
coming from..!
So, this is the white mandrill from deep in
the jungles of Africa.
We have concocted this potion by taking teardrops
from its eyes, mucus from its nostrils, and
saliva from its fangs and combining them on
a full moon night.
Just don’t try to remember where this is
coming from.
You may be able to drink it only then!!”
Namaste!
Four hundred and… thirty three I think..Yes..
Four hundred and thirty three..
This is about memory.
Especially, the sins.
Sins of memory.
Let’s get in..!
We have already encountered this book.
About the mind…
In fact, I had told you that we use this book
at the Zoho School of Design.
Its title, the titles of its chapters, are
all about how weak the observation ability
of the eyes are, ears are, our attention span,
and so on, everything with a negative undertone.
One of the chapters is about this..
Our Attention is Limited; Our Memory is Imperfect!
How we, in spite of known problems and difficulties,
continue to think that our memory is perfect!
Any religion, not just Christianity, .. talks
about sins.
Cardinal Sins.
Such a bad, wrong thing to do.
To even THINK about doing them.
Seven deadly sins, they called it.
While I was researching about it, I came to
know that it is not really mentioned in The
Holy Bible.
Unlike The Ten Commandments.., there is no
LIST called The Seven Deadly Sins.
But, there indeed is an informal list of what
God hates.
Over the years, our folks have filtered and
created a Seven Deadly Sins list.
And, what does that list feature?
Yes, Lust, Gluttony, Sloth, Greed, Envy, Wrath,
and Pride…
But, there is a Seven Deadly Sins of Memory,
did you know?
Without our knowledge or conscious collaboration,
with no way out without having to suffer it,
this list is the trap of the Seven Deadly
Sins of Memory.
Written by Daniel Schacter.
We are going to wind our way through these
seven.
And to remember them easily, I am going to
give you a prop.
Far out, in space, small and large rocks floating
around aimlessly, sometimes they even reach
Earth, hit Earth, threaten to hit Earth..
remember them?
That is what we are going to use as a background
framework while we walk through these seven.
Number One is Transcience.
The word itself means, Here today, Gone tomorrow.
Here this second.
Gone after just a while.
Short term memory, they call it.
Things that… you probably…
there is a bank transaction..
they give you a token for queueing up.
Your brain tells you — “You idiot, don’t
remember this forever..
You need to remember this, yes, but you need
to remember this only until your token is
called.
Anybody who remembers it even afterwards is
an idiot.
Anybody who doesn’t remember it until then
is also an idiot!
Transcience!
In our educational endeavours?
What is the important mistake we make?
Important things end up being placed in the
Transient bucket.
That is the mistake.
As you can see in the picture, that asteroid
is flying towards Earth.
But, it doesn’t even reach the surface of
the Earth.
It burns up in the atmosphere.
It is there.
A blinding streak of light.
But, it is not there.
It is gone.
Even before you ask, “Hey, what is that?!”,
it is gone!
Transient!
The Second Sin of Memory is Absent-Mindedness.
I am standing in front of you.
I am telling you something important.
I am not sure if you are really listening.
Probably you have another tab open.
Probably you are fiddling with something on
your mobile phone as you listen to me.
There are so many distractions in this world.
And these distractions, sometimes, become
the main attraction!
So, things that are supposed to reach you,
supposed to make an impact on you, supposed
to become a short term and then a long term
memory inside you, completely miss you.
My dad used to blast me thus: “My grandpa
used to tell me that I have this habit of
taking stuff through one ear and letting it
pass smoothly and unminded through the other
ear, but in your case, it looks like you are
afraid that while passing between the ears
they might be absorbed a bit by the brain,
and so you are focusing on echoing it off
the ear that receives it without any possibility
of it passing through and getting absorbed!
You seem so absent-minded!
Showing little attention..!”
The asteroid that passes so close to Earth,
but misses.
No impact!
Not only is it transient, you will not be
able to recall that it even happened.
“What?!
Did I even say something like that?!”
How often has it happened in YOUR life?!
The Third Sin is Blocking.
Blocking is another way of referring to the
“Tip of the tongue” situation.
You will meet somebody..
You will remember his name.
Some name that starts with A and ends with
A.., would be all you could remember.
Aaah…!
What is this?
What kind of memory is this?
On the tip of your tongue… dancing tantalisingly.
You will be able to recall correctly if offered
a this-or-that choice.
But, that real value of it, what is the exact
complete content of it, will always slip your
mind…
Why is this?
Well, scientists are still divided about the
real manner in which memories are stored in
the brain.
A memory is not a particular cell in a particular
part of the brain..
A small tap there, and it comes back to recall!
Or a slight bang elsewhere, and you will forget
it forever!
No!
It is a collection of neurons, talking to
each other, forming a network, becoming stronger,
which means electrical signals can pass faster..
that is memory!
As you recall it more and more, memory becomes
stronger!
When you look at it from that viewpoint, what
is Blocking?
When you have a particular thing, that is
so comfortable for you.. probably the color
of a person, or their tone of voice, or their
physical shape and structure, you probably
enjoy, you probably remember a lot of.. but
that is only one aspect, one dimension.
If you can’t remember something multidimensionally,
the memory doesn’t really form.
That strength of memory is missing, they say.
This crater, for example, is the Crater in
Arizona.
A huge meteor has fallen, but where is the
meteor??
Yes, it has indeed fallen..
Yes, the name starts with A and ends with
A!!
But, where is the meteor?
It is far underneath!
Deep down!
It has penetrated the surface and hidden itself
deep underground.
It has left a one-dimensional something to
perceive.
A crater.
But, where is the meteor?
Do you understand?
That is another sin it seems — it is called
Blocking.
The tip-of-the-tongue problem!
The Fourth Sin is Misattribution.
If you look at the Moon, this is how it would
look.
But, this is the face it presents us..
As we see from Earth.
It always shows us only one face, all the
time..
There is another face.
The Far Side of the Moon, they call it.
Do you know how it looks?
This is the far side of the moon.
This far side.., it almost looks like the
angry rashes on the face of a teenage girl,
doesn’t it?
Such a pimply surface!
Can you tell whether that particular thing
there was created by a particular meteor?
Don’t you see another meteor crater overlapping
it?
There is a small meteor crater formed inside
the circumference of a larger meteor crater,
do you see?
A meteor crater has perhaps been completely
obliterated by the new, larger one that formed
later, did you notice?!
This is the exact thing that happens when
you collect your memories.
How often have we fallen into that trap?!
“Hey, I have seen this exact person in that
other movie!
I watched that other movie, I have seen her!
Surely!”
you would say.
Misattribution.
“I have read this book, I have watched this
movie, I have met this person”, but you
wouldn’t have.
Crosstalk happening!
Neurons are triggering crosstalk!
And that is why your memory is not perfect!
Because, you misattribute!
You would exclaim deja vu!
Yes, it seems, but that is not true.
Misattribution.
The next sin is Suggestibility.
Great Wall of China.
We have heard much about it.
A true ethereal beauty.
Really beautiful place.
But, there is a prideful claim that the Chinese
used to make about it.
They used to call The Great Wall so GREAT
that it was the only man-made thing that was
visible even from outer space.
Even from The Moon!
It had become a widespread myth.
Everybody started thinking that this Great
Wall was the only human-made entity visible
from The Moon.
It remained a big popularising story..
The Great Wall received a lot more tourists,
surely.. until, people went into space and
started looking for the Great Wall, and couldn’t
spot it.
In fact, Yang Liwei, the first Chinese astronaut,
taikonauts they call themselves..
He searched far and wide, and had to confess,
“Sorry, I couldn’t spot The Great Wall”.
Why did we even believe something like that?
From childhood, we have been told about the
vada-making grandma in the Moon, the Chandamama,
… and claiming a twenty-foot-wide stone
structure will be visible from outer space..!
Who starts these?
But, we start believing it and that myth is
perpetuated.
That is exactly how our mind operates too.
All you need to have is one strong message..
repeated probably at an impressionable age..
repeated multiple times.. and your memory
becomes Suggestible.
Not only that, we can also change the existing
memory!
Remember Misattribution?
Suggestibility is another sin.
The Sixth Sin is Consistency Bias.
You have understood something in some way..
accepted it in a particular way.. then, you
probably want to believe that it will be so
in the future also.
Similarly, if you believe something to be
true at this time, now, you work backwards,
and want to believe that that is how it was
earlier also..
So, if you recall that “Flat Earth” school
of thought..
The King thought this was all the world that
was, at that time.
Then, they crossed the seas and oceans, and
discovered more places.
But, warned us of the edges..
Careful not to fall off!
Then, we mapped the whole world..
But we continued to map it in that comfortable,
flatworld approach.
So, this became our depiction of the world.
How wrong it is…?!
When we go into Space, and do a proper lookaround,
that is when we realise how wrong we were.
This Mercater projection is so wrong!
Along the Equator, it is to scale, but farther
you go above and below, you are grotesquely
skewing the size..
This map, on the other hand, shows you the
real way it should look!
Look at Greenland!
How small it actually is!
And, look at Australia!
That is the real size..
But, because it is being spread out.. a sphere
is being spread out into a rectangle, this
mis-shaped thing happens.
America is much smaller!
This is Consistency Bias.
If a husband and wife are very happy now,
we would want to believe that they had always
been happy!
“Even from before we got married to each
other, you know!”
If they are not happy now, if they are fighting
too often, their memory will extend backwards,
because of Consistency Bias, “Right from
Day One, we have been at loggerheads..
The talk was all about when we will head towards
Splitsville anyway..”
That is how the Consistency Bias shapes your
memory..
That is another sin.
The last sin, is Persistence.
Remember that White Mandrill?
That white mandrill always kept coming to
the king, in his mind.
And so, he could never drink the potion.
And so, he couldn’t live forever.. and become
a guest at Quotidian.
That is a problem!
We have memories that we WANT to forget!
But the more we want to forget it, the more
it becomes stronger.
Do you see a Meteor Crater here?
A very large meteorite!
Around 70 million years ago..
Banged on to Earth with a wham!
And that is, The Gulf of Mexico.
That crater is called Chicxulub.
That crater was the reason the dinosaurs died..
For tens of years, the atmosphere was a dark
cloud, vegetation died, all dinosaurs died
because there was no food to eat…
This mega monster.. rammed into the Earth,
but water has filled in, it has become the
Gulf of Mexico.. but that memory remains.
Deep inside.
The impact still remains.
Similarly, these memories..
That first love rejection, that ‘just miss’
tragedy in that amazing success story you
narrowly missed being part of, or the passing
away of a close friend or a close partner,
… they remain as strong memories..
Too strong.
That Persistence Bias..
How do we forget?
Why are some things so easy to remember but
so hard to forget, sometimes?
That is probably what we will try and see
in the next session, coming up in less than
24 hours!
So many sins…, isn’t there a deliverance
possible, from these?
We will see that tomorrow.
But, a small closing thought before that.
If you bring up the word memory, and look
for the person who did loads of research in
that subject, .. you will land on this guy.
Who is he?
With this unique beard?
(Oh, by the way, that is a cue by itself.
Look at his beard!)
Here is a trick I am going to use, to remember
this person’s name forever!
We have actually encountered this person once,
earlier too!
This is his house!
Along the sea’s edge..
Surf will kiss the doorway and recede..
The water will ebb.
It won’t touch the house.. it will ebb.
And his wife?
He remembers her birthday, her wedding day,
and also ensure he gives a special gift to
her on Valentine’s Day!
She is so happy!
And, her man… ebbing house..
That is his name!
Hermann Ebbinghaus!
Who lives in that house, silly house, near
the ebbing waters, whose wife, proudly proclaims
that this guy is her man!
Let’s meet tomorrow!
Thank you!